Colocal types (#1089)
UniMath/agda-unimath: src/orthogonal-factorization-systems/colocal-types.lagda.md

open import foundation.postcomposition-dependent-functions
open import foundation.postcomposition-functions
open import foundation.propositions
open import foundation.retracts-of-maps
open import foundation.retracts-of-types
open import foundation.universal-property-equivalences
open import foundation.universe-levels
open import foundation.whiskering-homotopies-composition
```

</details>

## Idea

A type `A` is said to be
{{#concept "colocal" Disambiguation="type at a map" Agda=is-colocal}} at the map
`f : X → Y`, or **`f`-colocal**, if the
[postcomposition map](foundation-core.postcomposition-functions.md)

```text
  f ∘_ : (A → X) → (A → Y)
```

is an [equivalence](foundation-core.equivalences.md). This is dual to the notion
of an [`f`-local type](orthogonal-factorization-systems.local-types.md), which
is a type such that the
[precomposition map](foundation-core.precomposition-functions.md)

```text
  _∘ f : (Y → A) → (X → A)
```

is an equivalence.

## Definition

### Types colocal at dependent maps

```agda
module _
  {l1 l2 l3 : Level} (A : UU l1) {X : A → UU l2} {Y : A → UU l3}
  (f : {a : A} → X a → Y a)
  where

  is-dependent-map-colocal : UU (l1 ⊔ l2 ⊔ l3)

>   is-dependent-map-colocal = is-equiv (postcomp-Π A (λ {a} → f {a}))

Reviewer: Does Agda have problems with
```suggestion
  is-dependent-map-colocal = is-equiv (postcomp-Π A f)
```
?

Author: Yes
<img width="412" alt="image" src="https://github.com/UniMath/agda-unimath/assets/5176294/810dab1e-c8bd-42ca-80f4-fd80d83f5321">

Reviewer: Looks like I still have garbage intuition around what Agda can and cannot infer 😅. It's interesting that it's able to infer it in `is-property-is-dependent-map-colocal`.

Author: You and me both 🥲
`postcomp-Π` is a bit of a weird one though

  is-colocal : UU (l1 ⊔ l2 ⊔ l3)
  is-colocal = is-dependent-map-colocal A f

  is-property-is-colocal : is-prop is-colocal
  is-property-is-colocal = is-property-is-dependent-map-colocal A f

  is-colocal-Prop : Prop (l1 ⊔ l2 ⊔ l3)
  is-colocal-Prop = is-dependent-map-colocal-Prop A f
```

## Properties

### Colocal types are closed under equivalences

```agda
module _
  {l1 l2 l3 l4 : Level}
  {X : UU l1} {Y : UU l2} {A : UU l3} {B : UU l4}
  (f : X → Y)
  where

  is-colocal-equiv : A ≃ B → is-colocal f B → is-colocal f A
  is-colocal-equiv e is-colocal-B =
    is-equiv-htpy-equiv
      ( ( equiv-precomp e Y) ∘e
        ( postcomp B f , is-colocal-B) ∘e
        ( equiv-precomp (inv-equiv e) X))
      ( λ g → eq-htpy ((f ∘ g) ·l inv-htpy (is-retraction-map-inv-equiv e)))

  is-colocal-inv-equiv : B ≃ A → is-colocal f B → is-colocal f A
  is-colocal-inv-equiv e = is-colocal-equiv (inv-equiv e)
```

### Colocality is preserved by homotopies

```agda
module _
  {l1 l2 l3 : Level} {X : UU l1} {Y : UU l2} {A : UU l3} {f f' : X → Y}
  where

  is-colocal-htpy : (H : f ~ f') → is-colocal f' A → is-colocal f A
  is-colocal-htpy H = is-equiv-htpy (postcomp A f') (htpy-postcomp A H)

>   is-colocal-htpy' : (H : f ~ f') → is-colocal f A → is-colocal f' A

Reviewer: Maybe keeping with the `inv-` mixfix
```suggestion
  is-colocal-inv-htpy : (H : f' ~ f) → is-colocal f' A → is-colocal f A
```

  is-colocal-htpy' H = is-equiv-htpy' (postcomp A f) (htpy-postcomp A H)
```

> ### If `S` is `f`-colocal then `S` is colocal at every retract of `f`

Reviewer: Nit: the title calls about assuming `is-colocal f S` to show `is-colocal g s` for `f retract-of-map f`, but the formalization switches the names

Author: Thanks! I remember justifying the discrepancy to myself a couple of times, but now I can't remember the justification, so I'll just change it 🙃👍

    is-equiv-retract-map-is-equiv'
      ( postcomp S f)
      ( postcomp S g)
      ( retract-postcomp S R₀)
      ( retract-postcomp S R₁)
      ( inv-htpy
        ( postcomp-coherence-square-maps
          ( f)
          ( inclusion-retract R₀)
          ( inclusion-retract R₁)
          ( g)
          ( S)
          ( i)))
      ( inv-htpy
        ( postcomp-coherence-square-maps
          ( g)
          ( map-retraction-retract R₀)
          ( map-retraction-retract R₁)
          ( f)
          ( S)
          ( r)))
```

### If every type is `f`-colocal, then `f` is an equivalence

```agda
module _
  {l1 l2 : Level} {X : UU l1} {Y : UU l2} (f : X → Y)
  where

  is-equiv-is-colocal : ({l : Level} (A : UU l) → is-colocal f A) → is-equiv f
  is-equiv-is-colocal = is-equiv-is-equiv-postcomp f
```

### All types are colocal at equivalences

```agda
module _
  {l1 l2 : Level} {X : UU l1} {Y : UU l2} (f : X → Y)
  where

  is-colocal-is-equiv :
    is-equiv f → {l : Level} (A : UU l) → is-colocal f A
  is-colocal-is-equiv is-equiv-f = is-equiv-postcomp-is-equiv f is-equiv-f
```

### A contractible type is `f`-colocal if and only if `f` is an equivalence

> This remains to be formalized.

Reviewer: Is this included in the batch of PRs to follow, or should it have an open issue?

Author: It's not following in a subsequent PR, but I am also hesitant to open an issue. It's one of those things that's trivial and not very useful as a formalized piece of code, but may assist a reader in understanding the concept better.

Author: Note that we have a lot of open claims in the library that do not have a corresponding issue. The series of issues I wrote in September last year targeted one particular wording of "it remains to be formalized" and hardly caught all open claims in the library. Something I only discovered a bit later.

Author: Well, I shouldn't say it's not useful. But it's not something I'm looking to use currently

Reviewer: If it's easy to work out, would it make sense to open an issue with the tag "good first issue", for people looking into contributing to the library?

Author: Now they're formalized so we don't have to worry about them 😇

Reviewer: Smh

```

<details><summary>Imports</summary>

```agda
open import foundation.action-on-identifications-functions
open import foundation.commuting-squares-of-maps
open import foundation.contractible-types
open import foundation.dependent-pair-types
open import foundation.empty-types
open import foundation.equivalences
open import foundation.equivalences-arrows
open import foundation.function-extensionality
open import foundation.function-types
open import foundation.homotopies
open import foundation.identity-types
open import foundation.postcomposition-dependent-functions
open import foundation.postcomposition-functions
open import foundation.propositions
open import foundation.retracts-of-maps
open import foundation.retracts-of-types
open import foundation.unit-type
open import foundation.universal-property-equivalences
open import foundation.universe-levels
open import foundation.whiskering-homotopies-composition
```

</details>

## Idea

A type `A` is said to be
{{#concept "colocal" Disambiguation="type at a map" Agda=is-colocal}} at the map
`f : X → Y`, or **`f`-colocal**, if the
[postcomposition map](foundation-core.postcomposition-functions.md)

```text

>   f ∘_ : (A → X) → (A → Y)

Reviewer 2: I still think that the hyphen is more conventional in mathematical texts for this purpose than the underscore 😅

```

is an [equivalence](foundation-core.equivalences.md). This is dual to the notion
of an [`f`-local type](orthogonal-factorization-systems.local-types.md), which
is a type such that the
[precomposition map](foundation-core.precomposition-functions.md)

```text
  _∘ f : (Y → A) → (X → A)
```

> is an equivalence.

Reviewer 2: I think this exposition deserves a bit more detail. For instance, we can't expect readers to be able to infer what kind of types are colocal merely from the sentence "This is dual to the notion of local". Things to include that would improve this prose would be answerts to the following questions:
- What does it really mean for a type to be colocal at `f`?
- Does it generalize already existing concepts?
- In what context is this definition relevant?

Author: Hi, I'm revisiting this PR again because I'd like to do some refactoring in the `orthogonal-factorization-systems` module that requires the PRs that touch it to be merged or closed, and I'm not entirely certain what you are asking here.

> - What does it really mean for a type to be colocal at `f`?

I thought it was stated quite clearly above:

````md
A type `A` is said to be
{{#concept "colocal" Disambiguation="type at a map" Agda=is-colocal}} at the map
`f : X → Y`, or **`f`-colocal**, if the
[postcomposition map](foundation-core.postcomposition-functions.md)

```text
  f ∘_ : (A → X) → (A → Y)
```

is an [equivalence](foundation-core.equivalences.md). [...]
````

I've added two additional equivalent conditions for a type to be colocal, but it's not clear to me if this is what you meant. Is there something else you'd like me to say?

> - Does it generalize or is it related to already existing concepts?

I added that its a specialization of left orthogonal maps

> - In what context is this definition relevant?

I would honestly like to avoid this question for now as I am still a little uncertain to what extent this definition is relevant. Still, I expect there's a comparison to be made to coreflective subuniverses.
